---
title: "Situational-aware multi-graph convolutional recurrent network (SA-MGCRN) for travel demand forecasting during wildfires"
collection: publications
category: Co-author
permalink: /publication/1_20241201_situationalaware
excerpt: 'This study develops a new methodological framework for modeling highly granular spatiotemporal trip generation in wildfire evacuations by using large-scale GPS data generated by mobile devices and state-of-the-art AI technologies.'
date: 2024-12-01
venue: 'Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0965856424002908'
citation: 'Zhang, X., Zhao, X., Xu, Y., Nilsson, D., &amp; Lovreglio, R. (2024). Situational-aware multi-graph convolutional recurrent network (SA-MGCRN) for travel demand forecasting during wildfires. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 190, 104242.'
---

Natural hazards, such as wildfires, pose a significant threat to communities worldwide. Real-time forecasting of travel demand during wildfire evacuations is crucial for emergency managers and transportation planners to make timely and better-informed decisions. However, few studies focus on accurate travel demand forecasting in large-scale emergency evacuations. To tackle this research gap, the study develops a new methodological framework for modeling highly granular spatiotemporal trip generation in wildfire evacuations by using (a) large-scale GPS data generated by mobile devices and (b) state-of-the-art AI technologies. Based on the travel demand inferred from the GPS data, we develop a new deep learning model, i.e., Situational-Aware Multi-Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network (SA-MGCRN), along with a model updating scheme to achieve real-time forecasting of travel demand during wildfire evacuations. The proposed methodological framework is tested using a real-world case study: the 2019 Kincade Fire in Sonoma County, CA. The results show that SA-MGCRN significantly outperforms all the selected state-of-the-art benchmarks in terms of prediction performance. Our finding suggests that the most important model components of SA-MGCRN are weekend indicator, population change, evacuation order/warning information, and proximity to fire, which are consistent with behavioral theories and empirical findings. SA-MGCRN can be directly used in future wildfire events to assist real-time decision-making and emergency management.