---
title: "Situational-aware multi-graph convolutional recurrent network (SA-MGCRN) for travel demand forecasting during wildfires"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-01-01-Situational-aware-multi-graph-convolutional-recurrent-network-SA-MGCRN-for-travel-demand-forecasting-during-wildfires
excerpt: ''
date: 2024-01-01
venue: 'Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice'
---

Natural hazards, such as wildfires, pose a significant threat to communities worldwide. Real-time forecasting of travel demand during wildfire evacuations is crucial for emergency managers and transportation planners to make timely and better-informed decisions. However, few studies focus on accurate travel demand forecasting in large-scale emergency evacuations. To tackle this research gap, the study develops a new methodological framework for modeling highly granular spatiotemporal trip generation in wildfire evacuations by using (a) large-scale GPS data generated by mobile devices and (b) state-of-the-art AI technologies. Based on the travel demand inferred from the GPS data, we develop a new deep learning model, i.e., Situational-Aware Multi-Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network (SA-MGCRN), along with a model updating scheme to achieve real-time forecasting of travel demand during wildfire evacuations. The proposed methodological framework is tested using a real-world case study: the 2019 Kincade Fire in Sonoma County, CA. The results show that SA-MGCRN significantly outperforms all the selected state-of-the-art benchmarks in terms of prediction performance. Our finding suggests that the most important model components of SA-MGCRN are weekend indicator, population change, evacuation order/warning information, and proximity to fire, which are consistent with behavioral theories and empirical findings. SA-MGCRN can be directly used in future wildfire events to assist real-time decision-making and emergency management.

Citation: ' Xiaojian Zhang,  Xilei Zhao,  Yiming Xu,  Daniel Nilsson,  Ruggiero Lovreglio, &quot;Situational-aware multi-graph convolutional recurrent network (SA-MGCRN) for travel demand forecasting during wildfires.&quot; Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 2024.'

Use [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=Situational+aware+multi+graph+convolutional+recurrent+network+(SA+MGCRN)+for+travel+demand+forecasting+during+wildfires){:target="_blank"} for full citation